A hospital’s ability to see patients and provide them with healthcare is a crucial performance metric. Long wait times between scheduling and appointment can drive patients to seek other providers or even to forgo medical attention altogether. UC Davis Health started the Access to Care project in 2019 to improve new patient access, and enlisted the help of our team - four students from the UC Davis MSBA program - as a practicum engagement.
This project presented the opportunity to experience the challenges of starting a new analytics venture in a healthcare organization. We discovered that, while exact measurements of new patient appointment supply and demand are difficult to calculate in ways we can compare with each other, approximations of these metrics can provide valuable insights quickly. We can then use these fast evaluations to determine which subspecialties or clinics need more appointment slots and use multivariate regression to estimate the number of additional provider hours we need to reach wait time targets.
In addition to computing kPIs related to access to care with decent proxies, we aimed to provide the exact number of provider hours needed to achieve a specific wait time target, as well as to predict future wait times using predicted demand from time series model. In other words, we can derive the optimal number of supply by inputting the predicted demand and target wait time values for each subspecialty. After comparing multiple models on model performance and discussing with clinic managers, we selected supply for the current week, supply for the next two weeks, and predicted demand for the current week as the input variables used to predict the average new patient wait time. The model for one of the subspecialities tells us that an average 10 hour increase per week in a given week’s supply (a 10% increase) will reduce average wait times by 1 day (a 4.2% decrease), if holding other variables constant. Meanwhile, 1 appointment (1%) increase in predicted demand per week will increase average wait time by 3 days (0.74%) per week. 
Through this analysis, we intend to inspire healthcare executives who want to harness the power of data analytics to improve their hospital’s ability to meet demand. We also hope to inform readers of some of the potential challenges of leveraging data for new purposes and how to work around them.
